url: https://health.maryland.gov/mmcp/eid/Pages/Home.aspx
Maryland Department of Health
Employed Individuals with Disabilities
​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​

Employed Individuals with Disabilities Program
The EID Program is a Medicaid buy-in program for workers with disabilities who would be ineligible for Medicaid because of their earnings.​

On January 1, 2024, changes to the Employed Individuals with Disabilities (EID) Program went into effect.

Changes include:

No more maximum income eligibility
No longer counting assets that belong only to your spouse
Now allowing Independence Accounts
New premium payment amounts based on your income
New applicants can now be as young as 16 years old 
For current participants, these changes will only go into effect for you when you next renew your Medicaid coverage.​ For more information, see the EID Program Changes Notice​.

Eligibility
To be eligible for the EID Program, you must meet all the following:

Be at least 16 years old but not yet 65 years old
Be working for pay
Have a disability that meets Social Security's medical criteria​ ​
​Be a U.S. Citizen or a qualified non-citizen – see Immigration Status Requirements and exceptions
Live in Maryland 
Meet the asset limit​ ​for the program​​
Work Requirement
To qualify for the EID Program, you may be employed or self-employed. There is no minimum amount you must earn to qualify, but your earnings must be subject to taxes. You can't be working “under the table". If you work for an employer, you should have pay stubs that show taxes withheld from your pay. If you are self-employed, you should pay estimated taxes. 

Resource Limit
Before January 1, 2024, there was an ​asset limit of $10,000 for you alone or $15,000 if you are married. Now if you are married, resources that are only your spouse's will no longer count. Resources that you own together, called joint assets, and assets only you own will still count towards your $10,000 limit. For more information about countable resources, see the FAQs.

New Premium Payment Amounts Based on Your Income​
​Individual Income Range Effective January 1, 2025​
​Couple Income Range Effective January 1, 2025
​Monthly Premium​
​​Less than $15,650
​Less than $21,150
​$0
$15,650 - $31,300

​$21,150 - $42,300
​$25
$31,300 - $39,125
​$42,300 - $52,875
​$40
​$39,125 - $46,950
​$52,875 - $63,450
​$55
​$46,950 - $70,425
$63,450 - $95,175
​4.0% of monthly countable income​
$70,425 - $93,900
​$95,175 - $126,900
​5.0% of monthly countable income
​$93,900+ 
​$126,900+
​7.5% of monthly countable income

​

How to Apply
Complete the EID Program application, sign and date it, enclose the supporting documents and mail to:
Eligibility Determination Division
EID Program
Maryland Department of Health
6 St. Paul Street, 4th Floor
Baltimore, MD 21202

EID Application
EID Application Instructions
Documents to Enclose
If you need help applying for the EID Program, and you work with a disability agency in Maryland, that agency may be able to help you. You may also contact the Center for Independent Living ​for help.

Payment Hardship Claim
If you are temporarily unable to pay your monthly premium, you may qualify for a Claim of Hardship Exemption. For more information, see the EID Hardship Exemption Fact Sheet.

Complete and submit the EID Hardship Request Form. 

EID Program FAQs
I already have Medicaid. Can the EID Program help me?
No, if you already have Medicaid, also known as Medical Assistance, or you get Medicaid under the Maryland Children's Health Program, you cannot be in the EID Program.

I already have private insurance. Can I still get Medicaid through the EID Program?
Yes. If you qualify for the EID program, Medicaid can supplement your other insurance.

I already have Medicare. Can the EID Program help me?
Maryland Medicaid can help pay your Medicare Part A (Hospital Insurance) and Part B (Medical Insurance) premiums through a Medicare Savings Program. The three programs are 
the Qualified Medicare Beneficiary (QMB) Program, Special Low-Income Medicare Beneficiary (SLMB) Program and Qualified Individual (QI) Program. You can be in one of these programs and be in the EID Program too. Learn more, see Medicare costs.

I get my Medicaid through a HealthChoice managed care organization (MCO). Will this change if I am in the EID Program?
Yes. If you are in the EID Program, you do not enroll in an MCO. You can see any Medicaid approved provider.

Can I be in the EID Program if I get services through a Medicaid Waiver?
Yes, for the following waiver programs only:
Brain Injury Waiver
Community Pathways Waiver
Community Supports Waiver
Family Supports Waiver
Home and Community-Based Options Waiver, also called the Community Options Waiver
What is a “countable" resource?
A resource, or asset, is money or property you own. Maryland law says which resources are “countable"  and “not countable" toward the resource limit of $10,000 for the EID Program.
For more information and a complete resource list, see COMAR 10.09.41.04 and 10.09.24.08.

“Counted" Resource Examples
If you are married, resources that you own together with your spouse, called joint assets
Cash
Bank accounts
Stocks, bonds, and dividends
Certificates of deposit (CDs) and money market accounts
Mutual fund shares
Cash value of a life insurance policy that the owner can convert to cash while the insured person is still alive, such as whole life
Annuities that permit the insured individual to access lump sums early
Profit sharing plans that permit early withdrawal
Ground rent
Most real estate, other than the house you live in
Inheritance, except
Property that does not go through probate  
Jointly owned property
Independence Account funds more than the recipient's annual gross income
Recipients must be the only owner of this account
“Not Counted" Resource Examples
If you are married, any resources that belong only to your spouse
The house you live in and the land it is on
Motor vehicles
401(k), 403(b), pension, IRA,  and Keogh plans
Household goods
Necessary for the maintenance, occupancy and use of the home
Most personal effects, except for luxury items like expensive furs and jewelry
Certain qualifying special needs trusts
Life insurance that does not permit the owner to take cash from before the insured person dies, such as term policies
Certain types of home energy assistance
Burial savings accounts up to $1,500
Irrevocable funeral funds, plans, agreements, trusts, insurance, or pre-need contracts of any value that are payable to  a funeral home 
Burial plots
Earned Income Tax Credit funds
Federal income tax refunds
Education assistance
Certain escrow accounts, such as security deposits
Housing assistance through public subsidized housing programs
Money and property in a Plan for Achieving Self Support (PASS)
PASS is an agreement with Social Security that lets an individual set aside money or property to pay for expenses needed to reach a work goal and receive higher SSI (Supplemental Security Income) checks to help offset the costs.
HUD Family Self-Sufficiency (FSS) Program escrow account funds.
People who live in public housing or who have Housing Choice Vouchers may use FFS.
FSS holds funds that help the individual or household become more self-sufficient by paying for education, job training, counseling, childcare, or transportation aid.
Certain kinds of income-producing property
Crime victims' compensation, for expenses incurred or losses suffered
Disaster relief assistance
Certain assistance received if a federally funded project acquires, rehabilitates, or demolishes your property
Cash or replacement received for the loss of a resource (such as a house or car) that is usually not countable for nine months
Who can help if I have questions about countable resources?
The rules are complex, and everyone's circumstances differ. You may want to talk to someone who can explain the legal rules and advise you based on your situation. To find legal help, contact:
Disabilities Rights Maryland
Maryland Legal Aid
How do I find work so I can qualify for the EID Program?
For more information, visit the Maryland Department of Disabilities, Looking for Work.

Who will decide if I am eligible for the EID Program?
Maryland Medicaid's Eligibility Determination Division (EDD) will determine your eligibility.

How do I find out the status of my EID Program application?
To check on the status of your application, call the Eligibility Determination Division Hotline at 800-226-2142.

When will my EID Medicaid start?
If the Eligibility Determination Division (EDD) approves your EID application, your Medicaid coverage will take effect on the first day of the month that EDD received your application. However, you must pay your first monthly premium, if you have one, for your Medicaid coverage to start.

Will my first premium payment be higher than the monthly amount?
Your first premium payment may be higher.
You must pay the monthly premium from the date of receipt of your application if you did not provide documents in a timely manner, which delayed the processing of your application.
Medicaid may charge you for one or two months of premiums in advance.
How long can I be in the EID program?
You can be in the EID Program until your 65th birthday if you remain eligible and pay your  monthly premium if you have one.

Do I have to reapply for the EID Program every twelve months?
Yes, you need to reapply for Medicaid and the EID Program, also called renewal or redetermination, every twelve months. You will get a renewal notice in the mail two months before it is time for you to reapply. If you have an email address on file in your myMDTHINK account, you will get an email notice to let you know it is time to renew.

When your notice arrives, complete your renewal right away. Go to MarylandBenefits​ to complete it online or return it by mail. Be sure to send it in and include all required documents by the deadline to avoid losing your Medicaid coverage.

When you renew, the Eligibility Determination  Division will decide if you are still eligible. They will also determine if you have a premium payment and the amount. They will notify you by mail or email within 45 days of receiving your renewal application.

What can I do if the Eligibility Determination Division denies my EID application?
You can appeal the denial by requesting a fair hearing. See the instructions in your denial letter. Legal help may be available from Disability Rights Maryland.

How long will it take to know if you approve me for the EID Program?
You will usually get a decision within 30 days of the date we get your application if
You get a Social Security Disability check, or
You got Social Security Disability or Supplemental Security Income (SSI ) checks in the last few years, and
You provided all the information and documents needed to process your application – for example proof of earned income, assets, and allowable deductions
If you have never received Social Security disability checks, it can take up to 90 days to get a decision.

How can I pay my premium?
Pay Online: You will need your account number to pay online. You can find your account number on your invoice. Pay by credit card, debit card or from your checking or savings account. Go to the Payments Portal.

Pay by Mail: Pay by check or money order.
Clip the bottom part of the monthly invoice and mail with payment
Write the amount you are paying on the invoice
Write your account number in the memo line of the check
Write in any address or phone number change on the invoice
Use the envelope provided to mail your payment
Misplaced your payment envelope? Mail payment to EID Premium Program, P.O. Box 17002, Baltimore, MD 21298-8812.
 
​Resources
​Centers for Independent Living
Disability Rights Maryland
Independence Now​
State Health Insurance Assistance Program (SHIP)​
Contact
If you have questions about the status of your EID application, contact the Eligibility Determination Division (EDD) at 800-226-2142​. ​

​​NOTICE: Employed Individuals with Disabilities (EID) Premium Payment
​You must pay the premium payment amount listed on your monthly invoice.​ 

Failure to make payment may result in loss of Medicaid benefits and y​​​our account being sent to collections.


